<h1>Breaking Down Asteroid Populations Based Using Period Data</h1>

<h2>Description</h2>
<p> Asteroids, also called planetesimals, are remnants from the formation of our solar system. They come in a range of diameters, class types (based on composition), and orbital class– which refers to where in the solar system the Asteroid is found (e.g. Near Earth asteroids, Outer Main Belt asteroids, etc). Most of the asteroids in the solar system are found in the Main Asteroid Belt–a dense ring between Jupiter's orbit and Mars’s orbit. 
For this project, I looked at the distribution of various orbital parameters for asteroids in the Outer-Main Asteroid Belt. During my initial exploration, I was surprised to see that the distribution of Period values is trimodal and after doing some initial research, I found out that the distribution of Period values for asteroids in the Main Belt can be shaped by several factors. Resonance with Jupiter has created “Kirkwood gaps”–gaps in the asteroid belt at certain period values where asteroids with periods that are simple fractions of Jupiter's period have been pushed out of the asteroid belt because of the tugging from Jupiter's gravitational field when their orbit aligns with Jupiter's orbit. Resonance with Jupiter has also created two distinct asteroid populations: Trojan Asteroids– also called the L5 and L6 groups. These two asteroid clusters have the same Orbital Period as Jupiter however, one group orbits slightly ahead of Jupiter, and the other group slightly behind. Jupiter’s gravitational force is constantly pulling at the Main Asteroid Belt, which has also created “Renegade Asteroids” (asteroids with unusual orbital paths, inclinations, or eccentricities). My goal for this project was to understand the specific dynamics shaping the unique trimodal distribution of period data for sample of outer main belt asteroids I worked with. I was ultimately able to identify distinct populations of asteroids within the sample and determined some of the differences in physical parameters of the different populations. 
I chose to work with data from JPL's small body database. The data from the NASA SBDB has been collected through various spacecraft missions and on ground-observations. Given that the collection of data in the SBDB is from an amalgamation of sources and methods that were then stitched together by scientists at JPL, it seems unlikely that there would be systematic bias. While systematic error could be introduced based on detection method, the JPL database doesn’t provide a way to divide data by detection method, so there is no way to account for possible detection method biases. Therefore, the best way to correct against detection bias would be to proceed with an experiment/statistical test and then check the results against the general consensus in the scientific community, or conduct the same statistical test with a different database and see how the results compare. I did not perform this type of corroboration for this project, but it would be a good endeavor for a future project. 
The variables that I looked at were Eccentricity, Period, Perihelion Distance, and Semi-Major Axis. Below is a four-panel plot of these variables along with their respective means and standard deviations. Eccentricity is a measure of how elliptical an object’s orbit is, with 0 being the eccentricity of a perfectly circular orbit and 1 being an unbounded orbit. The mean Eccentricity for the sample I worked with was 0.14, indicating that the trend was towards circular orbits.  Period is the length of time it takes for the object to complete one orbit around the object which it orbits, the mean Period was 2268.4 days. This is around 6.2 years (between Mars’s ~1.8 year orbit and Jupiter's 12 year orbit). Perihelion Distance is the shortest distance an object reaches at some point in its orbit between the object and the sun. Semi-Major Axis is the length of the elongated stretch of an object's orbit. 
 </p>



